---
layout: single 
title: "Guide to Python's re Module" 
classes: wide
last_modified_at:
---

Regular expression, shortened to "regex", is a powerful tool for text processing and manipulation. They allow you to search, extract, and replace patterns in strings. In Python, the re module provides access to this powerful functionality, making it an essential tool for any Python developer.


## Getting Started with the re Module:

To use the re module, simply import it into your Python code


```python
import re
```

Once imported, you can utilize various functions like match, search, findall, sub, and compile to work with regular expressions.

```python
print(re.match('a', 'apple'))
# output: <re.Match object; span=(0, 1), match='a'>

print(re.match('b', 'apple'))
# output: None
```

In the next section, we will delve deeper into the re module's functionalities and explore practical examples of its applications.

## Metacharacters 

Metacharacters `. ^ $ * + ? { } [ ] \ | ( )` are special characters in regular expressions that have a specific meaning beyond their literal representation. They provide powerful tools for building complex and efficient patterns for text matching and manipulation.

 .
: Matches any single character (except newline)\
`a.a` MATCHES "aaa", "aba", "a a", ...\
`a.a` does NOT MATCHES "abba", "a\na", ...


 ^
: Matches the beginning of the string\
  `^abc` MATCHES "abcd", "abc_", ...\
  `^abc` does NOT MATCHES "aabc", "\_abc", ...


$
: Matches the end of the string\
  `abc$` MATCHES "aabc", "\_abc", ...\
  `abc$` does NOT MATCHES "abcd", "abc_", ...


*
: Matches 0 or more repetitions\
  `ab*c` MATCHES "abbc", "ac", ...\
  `ab*c` does NOT MATCHES "abdc", "a c", ...


+
: Matches 1 or more repetitions\
  `ab+c` MATCHES "abc", "abbc", ...\
  `ab+c` does NOT MATCHES "ac", "abdc", ...


?
: Matches 0 or 1 repetitions\
  `ab?c` MATCHES "ac", "abc", ...\
  `ab?c` does NOT MATCHES "abbc", "abdc", ...


{m}
: where m is a number\
  Matches exactly m repetitions\
  `ab{3}c` MATCHES "abbbc", "abbbcde", ...\
  `ab{3}c` does NOT MATCHES "abbc", "abb_c", ...


{m,n}
: where m and n are numbers\
  Matches exactly from m to n repetitions\
  `ab{3,5}c` MATCHES "abbbc", "abbbbbc", ...\
  `ab{3,5}c` does NOT MATCHES "abbc", "abbbbbbc", ...


[ ]
: Mathes any characters within the specified range\
  `[abc]` MATCHES "a", "b", "c", "az", ...\
  `[a-c]` MATCHES "a", "b", "c", "zb", ...\
  `[^a-c]` MATCHES any characters EXCEPT "a", "b", or "c"


\
: Escapes special characters or signals a *special sequence*\
  `a\^b` MATCHES "a^b", "a^bc", ...\
  `a\^b` does NOT MATCHES "a\^b", ...


A|B
: where A and B are *expressions*\
  Matches either A or B\
  `ab|cd` MATCHES "abc", "bcd", ...\
  `ab|cd` does NOT MATCHES "aacc", "bc", ...
  

( )
: Matches and captures *expression* inside parentheses\
  `(bcd)` MATCHES "abcd", "bcde", ...\
  `(bcd)` does NOT MATCHES "abc", "cde", ...


## Special Sequences

Beyond basic characters, Python's re module offers special sequences like `\d` (digits), `\s` (whitespace), and `\w` (words). These tools let you build patterns to match specific text formats, extract data, and manipulate strings with precision.

\d
: Matches any digit (0-9)\
  `\d` MATCHES "1234", "12 eggs", ...\
  `\d` does NOT MATCHES "abcd", "dozen", ...


\D
: Matches any non-digit\
  `\D` MATCHES "abcd", "dozen", ...\
  `\d` does NOT MATCHES "1234", "12", ...


\s
: Matches any whitespace character (space, tab, newline)\
  `ab\scd` MATCHES "ab cd", "ab\tcd", "ab\xa0cd" ...\
  `ab\scd` does NOT MATCHES "abcd", "ab_cd", ...


\S
: Matches any non-whitespace character\
  `a\Sbcd` MATCHES "abcd", "a_bcd", "aabcd" ...\
  `a\Sbcd` does NOT MATCHES "a bcd", "a\tcd", ...


\w
: Matches any word character (a-z, A-Z, 0-9, and _)\
  `a\wb` MATCHES "aab", "a5b", "a_b_" ...\
  `a\wb` does NOT MATCHES "a b", "a+b", ...


\W
: Matches any non-word character\
  `a\Wb` MATCHES "a@b", "a b", "a.b" ...\
  `a\Wb` does NOT MATCHES "aab", "a_b", ...


## Functions

Now, let us look at some of the common Python Regex functions.

re.search(pattern, string)
: Find the pattern within the string
returns `re.Match` object
  ```python
  re.search('\d','I am 12 years old')
  # output: <re.Match object; span=(5, 6), match='1'>
  ```


re.match(pattern, string)
: Find the pattern at the beginning of a string
returns `re.Match` object
  ```python
  re.match('\d','12 years old')
  # output: <re.Match object; span=(0, 1), match='1'>
  ```


re.split(pattern, string)
: Divides a string based on the pattern
returns `list` of string
  ```python
  result = re.split(':','Question:Answer')
  print(result)
  # output: ['Question', 'Answer']
  ```


re.findall(pattern, string)
: Extracts all occurrences of the pattern
returns `list` of string
  ```python
  result = re.findall('\w+','#pizza, #coke')
  print(result)
  # output: ['pizza', 'coke']
  ```

re.sub(pattern, replace, string)
: Replaces matched patterns with new text
returns `string`
  ```python
  result = re.sub('\d+','2020', 'I was born in 2000')
  print(result)
  # output: I was born in 2020
  ```

re.compile(pattern)
: Compile a regular expression pattern
returns `re.Pattern` object
  ```python
  pattern = re.compile('\d+')
  result = pattern.search('I was born in 2000')
  print(result)
  # output: <re.Match object; span=(14, 18), match='2000'>
  ```

## re.Match Objects

Match.group()
: Returns captured string that matches the pattern inside `( )`

  ```python
  pattern = re.compile(r'(.*?)@(\w+\.\w+)')
  email = 'username@company.com'
  match = pattern.search(email)
  print(match)
  # output: <re.Match object; span=(0, 20), match='username@company.com'>
  ```

  From the above example, `match` captured two strings from email address.
  To return the match strings;

  ```python
  match.group(0)        # The entire match
  # output: 'username@company.com'
  match.group(1)        # The first subgroup
  # output: 'username'
  match.group(2)       # The second subgroup
  # output: 'company.com'  
  match.group(1,2)      # Multiple arguments give us a tuple
  # output: ('username', 'company.com')
  ```
  If the regular expression uses the `(?P<name>...)` syntax, the captured `string` can also be identifed by their group name.

  ```python
  pattern = re.compile(r'(?P<name>.*?)@(?P<domain>\w+\.\w+)')
  email = 'username@company.com'
  match = pattern.search(email)
  match.group('name')
  # output: 'username'
  match.group('domain')
  # output: 'company.com' 
  ```

Boolean
: Match objects always have a boolean value of `True` if match, and `None` if no match. You can use `if` statement with the `Match` object
```python
  match = re.search('\d','I am 12 years old')
  if match:
    print('Match found')
  else:
    print('No match')
  # output: Match found
```